# Вступление

When contemplating the foreword for every edition of this book, we always had more people we’d like contributions from than pages we could spare. In this fifth edition, we’ve again asked a select group of people from the Asterisk community to write a few words about Asterisk from their perspective.

## Joshua Colp (Senior Software Developer, Sangoma/Digium)

Over 15 years ago, I downloaded Asterisk onto my laptop and placed my first VoIP call using IAX2 to the Digium PBX. I held my breath in anticipation, waiting to hear a voice, until finally the sound of Allison came out of my laptop. At that point I knew there was something special to Asterisk. It lit this spark of interest and imagination in me: my laptop had actually placed a call! The realization that with only a little effort I could take calls and do with them what I wanted was addictive and exciting—a sentiment shared by many to this day.

Asterisk today is vastly different from how it was during that time. In the past, it was primarily focused on being a PBX. It had all of the features and continued to gain new ones to propel it further into that area. Over time, however, the project has evolved to one where Asterisk is a toolkit that can be used alone or in combination with other projects to build things. It’s there to spark the question of “Can I do this?” in your mind and allow you to see it through.

This simple question is what drives many of the decisions made about Asterisk and its direction. “Is this right for the users?”, “Is this what people truly need?,” “Does this break things?,” and “Can they build what they want with this?” Together, these questions help ensure that people can realize their ideas. This is what excites me about Asterisk today—seeing people use the tools to create something new without hindrance.

I think that, going forward, this will continue for Asterisk. It will continue to add new tools and functionality to provide greater flexibility and options for those building things, while respecting its legacy and how users already use it. It will continue to be part of bigger and better solutions, some of which may not even come to mind now. We’ve only taken a few steps forward and have many to go.

I challenge new and old users of Asterisk alike to revisit what Asterisk can do, to learn new features that have been added, and to build something new and exciting out of your normal skill set. If you hit a roadblock where Asterisk can’t do what you need, then participate in the project and contribute. Help others who may be trying to do the same thing. Become not just someone who uses Asterisk, but also someone who helps others realize their dream.

## Dan Jenkins (Founder, Nimble Ape Ltd)

Asterisk was my first foray into the open source telephony world, and as a web developer, I found it very different from what I was used to, coming from the web industry. The Asterisk project has moved on since then, and now the project incorporates many APIs and technologies that a typical web developer has come to expect. The inclusion of WebRTC and Asterisk’s REST interface is vital for integration from developers used to building for the web platform. Asterisk is what I eventually ended building a business around—it is truly a remarkable piece of software and has a brilliant community of people who both use and improve it. It’s been my pleasure being a part of this community and proofreading this book for the future community.

## Joyce Wilmot (Senior Web Developer)

I was introduced to Asterisk in 2012 when I was working for Voicenation, a company that provides live answering service 24/7/365 for thousands of customers. At the time, the call center was quickly outgrowing the third-party software they were using. Unable to find a flexible and cost-effective solution for their quickly expanding call center, Voicenation decided that they needed to create their own call center software. I was tasked with creating this software, which started my journey with Asterisk. What started as a monumental task (since I did not have prior IP telephony experience) quickly became a fascination with Asterisk as I discovered how it simplified our setup without sacrificing power and flexibility.

Fast-forward nine years and tens of millions of calls later, and Asterisk still faithfully and reliably runs our call center. This was my first exposure to open source software. Asterisk is obviously an open source success story that illustrates how open source software fuels entrepreneurism—and how entrepreneurism, in return, fuels development and enhancement of the open source software. I’m thrilled to be part of that cycle, and look forward to being part of the community as Asterisk continually evolves to keep up with the ever-changing world of telecommunications.

## Matt Florell (Founder, VICIdial)

My first exposure to open source telephony back in 2001 was actually not with Asterisk. It was with a different software package, one that took me a couple of months to get working, using a simple IVR to log contact requests for my employer at the time. It was not an easy system to work with or modify, so I didn’t do much else with it beyond that first IVR project. Two years later, I had a request from a client to build a much more complex telephony system, one that would require user interactions through a computer. I knew the platform I had been using wasn’t going to work for a project like this, so I looked around at both commercial and open source options. That’s when I learned about Asterisk, which looked like it could be an ideal platform for this project. I bought a T1 card with which to do some testing, and within two hours of its arrival, I had configured it and I was able to replicate the old project that had taken me two months to build. After that, I was hooked. The VICIdial Open-Source Contact Center project grew out of that project; to date, over 100,000 Asterisk systems have been installed as a part of VICIdial clusters, and those are just the ones we know about.

Asterisk was very different from the mostly web-based open source packages that I had worked with in the past, and it had quite a few quirks and bugs in the earlier days that you had to work around (sometimes in pretty creative ways). But our more recent experiences with the Asterisk 13 branch have shown significant improvements in both capacity and stability, compared to earlier branches. There have also been many new features added that have allowed us to add new functionality to our VICIdial package. Two of those are the ability to pause call recordings and the addition of several layers of new SIP carrier logging.

Back in 2003 when I started using Asterisk, there were no real “releases.” You had to find a stable build from one of the recent CVS revisions and test it out. As time went on, the development and maintenance of the different branches became much more stable, and the use of Asterisk in production systems all over the world skyrocketed. Today, Asterisk is the telephony core of thousands of different service offerings, with billions of phone calls a day being placed through them. It is being installed on wide varieties of hardware, from tiny embedded systems to server farms with hundreds of high-powered machines. There are now millions of people who use Asterisk every day who have no idea that they are interacting with a piece of open source software.

Among our client base alone, we have several Fortune 500 companies, as well as school districts, social clubs, political organizations, municipal emergency services organizations, and of course, thousands of different types of commercial operations. While the low acquisition cost is a common reason given for going with an Asterisk-based solution, we often hear that the fact that it is open source is a big plus, as well as there being no possibility of vendor lock-in. One of our larger clients even cited their use of open source telephony software as a “distinct strategic advantage” over their competitors because of the flexibility of the systems and their ability to self-manage them without having to rely on outside vendors. From what I’ve seen so far, the future of Asterisk is an ever-growing installed base and continued enhancements. I look forward to working with it for another 16 years, at least.

## Matt Fredrickson (Director of Asterisk Engineering, Sangoma/Digium)

I have had the opportunity to work with Asterisk for the last 18 years, and have seen it grow from a small project with one or two people into something that has a life of its own with hundreds of contributors. It’s amazing to see the number of different places it has disrupted traditional telecom—at home, in the office, and in the enterprise. As traditional communication patterns shift, the Asterisk project continues to be in the place where it does best—bridging old forms of communication with the new, and pushing the boundaries of what can be done with the new. This book will help you see the most modern face of Asterisk and how to better utilize it in your telecommunications infrastructure. Huge thanks goes to Jim Van Meggelen for all the hard work on putting this most current edition together.

[Аннотация](README.md) | [Содержание](SUMMARY.md) | [Предисловие](preface.md)